# Using NoSQL to Power Student Developer Projects
## How MongoDB and Bit Project Are Collaborating to Make NoSQL Database Technologies More Accessible Than Ever to Students

### Overview: 

Bit Project is a student-run organization based in UC Davis that provides an open-source education platform on which students around the world can collaborate on curriculum and attend workshops on industry-standard technical subjects. Our mission is to democratize technical education by empowering students to develop interactive learning experiences that support collaboration and make education accessible for all.

MongoDB is an open-source, documentation-focused database program that lets users store data without worrying about the complications of data structures. Unlike traditional databases, data are stored as separate documents in collections rather than in rows and columns. MongoDB are the industry leaders in NoSQL databases, which are non-relational and store and retrieve data through key values. NoSQL is relatively new, but is more flexible and approachable than SQL. MongoDB makes learning and understanding database management simple for students with little to no experience with complex CS concepts through user-friendly features. 

###  Why We Partnered With MongoDB:

At Bit Project, we strive to deliver the most up-to-date technical knowledge to students and underrepresented audiences through our curriculum. In particular, our Head of Developer Relations, Kevin Vuong, has been at the forefront of the collaboration. Leading a team of developers to incorporate companies’ developer tools into curriculum lets him observe technologies that are becoming more mainstream in the tech industry. MongoDB’s novel, user-friendly services certainly fit what Vuong, and Bit Project as a whole, was looking for. “Traditionally, we use SQL to manage databases, which is very streamlined and structured. But, NoSQL allows for more flexibility and is a more modern technology,” Vuong explains, “What’s so amazing about MongoDB is that they’re really the industry leaders in NoSQL, and we wanted to get their expertise and input on making any NoSQL or MongoDB content.” 

Our main goal was to bring their database technology to a demographic that will surely need them in the future. According to Vuong, the lack of NoSQL content in current college level computer science (CS) courses can put students at a disadvantage in pursuing CS careers. “SQL has been the industry standard for 20, 25 years, so it’s traditionally taught in universities, but it’s not very easy to learn at first,” he states, “Everything you can do with SQL, you can do with NoSQL.” Due to inaccessibility of NoSQL even at the college level, we wanted to bring MongoDB’s technology to passionate students who want to learn about databases but don’t have the means to do so and provide them the resources to pursue their own interests and build new and innovative projects.

Recently, MongoDB launched MongoDB University, a free educational program for university students to take courses on NoSQL technology and practice for developer and database administrator (DBA) exams. “After looking at the MongoDB courses, we wanted to make them even more interactive, beginner-friendly, and accessible to not just technical majors, but non-tech students as well,” Vuong says. We decided to expand upon MongoDB’s educational efforts by hosting a university-wide workshop about MongoDB databases and how they apply to everyday life.

### Planning and Execution:

	To create the workshop, developers developed an interactive scavenger hunt spanning the entire workshop event that taught students fundamental NoSQL concepts and how they applied to MongoDB. The activity taught workshop students about different types of queries, or data requested from a database. The developers created the entire activity, a website with instructions for the workshop, and contributed to most of the PowerPoint slides for the workshop. As for MongoDB’s contributions, they actively participated in reviewing all of the workshop activities and provided constructive feedback on clarity and usage of MongoDB products. For any specific issues developers had while creating the workshop, MongoDB guided them towards helpful resources, such as links to MongoDB University courses, to clear up any confusion. 

	The actual workshop began with an introduction to databases and NoSQL and their importance to the industry. Next, we discussed the differences between SQL and NoSQL databases and made analogies to either database to familiarize students with both. Afterwards, we introduced MongoDB Atlas, a program that lets users host their database online without needing to code beforehand. Using the sample database already set up in Atlas, the students were taught to search for and execute multiple types of queries, which perform certain functions within the database to find, add, or delete information. The students were to use the queries to find all the letters of a word; once found, they could proceed to the next activity page. 

At first, many attendees had questions about databases’ importance, as well as the differences between SQL and NoSQL. Most of the students were familiar with SQL, but had not used it in a while. During the scavenger hunt activity and throughout the workshop, the audience asked engaging questions about the use of queries to fulfill the activity’s goals. 

### Results: 

Overall, the reception of the workshop was very positive. The students were enthusiastic learners and active participants in any Q&As or discussions that took place. MongoDB also provided lots of tchotchkes, such as waterproof stickers and enamel pins, that the students greatly enjoyed. As a student organization, we at Bit Project have also gained a great deal from our collaboration with MongoDB. Being able to partner with a major player in the tech industry sets us apart from other organizations in that the content we deliver to our audiences goes through a credible primary source. Working with MongoDB also allowed us to teach industry-standard concepts to those who need or want to learn them in a relatable way. As opposed to typical college CS courses, which use examples exclusively within a set curriculum or textbook, our collaboration lets us bring actual skills and issues that appear in the tech industry to our audience. 

### Plans for the Future:

	We would love to collaborate with MongoDB for future workshops, but instead of solely teaching basic concepts, we would like to teach more in-depth concepts. While teaching the basics of MongoDB and NoSQL is important, it is equally as crucial to introduce students to more complex features, skills, and problems that arise from the basics. We would also like to integrate MongoDB University courses into our educational resources and make those especially accessible and relatable for university students who lack technical experience. 
Through a future collaboration, we believe that both Bit Project and MongoDB will be able to better achieve our goals of making technical education more accessible and approachable to a larger university student network than ever before. We look forward to seeing what our partnership with MongoDB has to offer in the future.
