Using NoSQL to Power Student Developer Projects
How MongoDB and Bit Project Are Collaborating to Make NoSQL Database Technologies More Accessible Than Ever to Students
Overview:
Bit Project is a student-run organization based in UC Davis that provides an open-source education platform on which students around the world can collaborate using our curriculum and attend workshops on industry-standard technical subjects. Our mission is to democratize technical education to empower students and provide them with interactive learning experiences.

MongoDB is an open-source, documentation-focused database program that lets users store data without worrying about the complications of data structures. Unlike traditional databases, data are stored as separate documents in collections rather than in rows and columns. MongoDB are the industry leaders in NoSQL databases, which are non-relational and store and retrieve data through key values. Although NoSQL is relatively new, it is more flexible and approachable than SQL. MongoDB makes learning and understanding database management simple for students with little to no experience with complex CS concepts through user-friendly features.

Why We Partnered With MongoDB:
At Bit Project, we strive to deliver the most up-to-date technical knowledge to students and underrepresented audiences through our curriculum. In particular, our Head of Developer Relations, Kevin Vuong, has been at the forefront of the collaboration. Leading a team of developers to incorporate companies’ developer tools into curriculum lets him observe technologies that are becoming more mainstream in the tech industry. MongoDB’s novel, user-friendly services certainly fit what Vuong, and Bit Project as a whole, was looking for. “Traditionally, we use SQL to manage databases, which is very streamlined and structured. But, NoSQL allows for more flexibility and is a more modern technology,” Vuong explains, “What’s so amazing about MongoDB is that they’re the industry leaders in NoSQL, and we wanted to get their expertise and input on making NoSQL or MongoDB content.”

Our main goal was to bring their database technology to a demographic that will benefit from NoSQL content. According to Vuong, the lack of NoSQL content in current college level computer science (CS) courses can put students at a disadvantage in pursuing CS careers. “SQL has been the industry standard for 20, 25 years, so it’s traditionally taught in universities, but it’s not very easy to learn at first,” he states, “Everything you can do with SQL, you can do with NoSQL.” Due to inaccessibility of NoSQL even at the college level, we wanted to bring MongoDB’s technology to passionate students who want to learn about databases but don’t have the means to do so and provide them the resources to pursue their own interests and build new and innovative projects.

Recently, MongoDB launched MongoDB University, a free educational program for university students to take courses on NoSQL technology and prepare for developer and database administrator (DBA) exams. “After looking at the MongoDB courses, we wanted to make them even more interactive, beginner-friendly, and accessible to not just technical majors, but non-tech students as well,” Vuong says. We decided to expand upon MongoDB’s educational efforts by hosting a university-wide workshop about MongoDB databases and their multiple uses in everyday life.

Planning and Execution:
To create the workshop, developers created an interactive scavenger hunt that taught students fundamental NoSQL concepts and their applications to MongoDB. The activity taught workshop students about different types of queries, or data requested from a database. In addtion, develops created a website with instructions for the workshop, and contributed to most of the PowerPoint slides for the workshop. MongoDB’s provided extensive feedback on all workshop activities through their participation, as well as clarity and usage of MongoDB products. For any specific issues developers had while creating the workshop, MongoDB guided them towards helpful resources, such as links to MongoDB University courses.

The actual workshop began with an introduction to databases and NoSQL and their importance to the industry. Next, we discussed  differences between SQL and NoSQL databases and made analogies to both databases to familiarize students with both. Afterwards, we introduced MongoDB Atlas, a program that lets users host their database online without needing to code beforehand. Using the sample database already set up in Atlas, the students were taught to search for and execute multiple types of queries, enabling them to perform certain functions within the database to find, add, or delete information. The aim was for students to use the queries to find all the letters of a wor. Once found, they could proceed to the next activity page.

Many attendees intially had questions about the importance of databases, as well as the differences between SQL and NoSQL. Most students were familiar with SQL, but had not used it in a while. During the scavenger hunt activity and throughout the workshop, the audience asked engaging questions about the use of queries to fulfill the activity’s goals.

Results:
Overall, the reception of the workshop was very positive. The students were enthusiastic learners and active participants in any Q&As or discussions that took place. As a student organization, we at Bit Project have also gained a great deal from our collaboration with MongoDB. Being able to partner with a major player in the tech industry benefits our organization in that we can further realize our goal of delivering content to students by partnering with industry leaders. Working with MongoDB also allowed us to teach industry-standard concepts to those who need or want to learn them. As opposed to typical college CS courses, which use examples exclusively within a set curriculum or textbook, our collaboration lets us bring actual skills and issues that appear in the tech industry to our audience.

Plans for the Future:
We would love to collaborate with MongoDB for future workshops, but instead of solely teaching basic concepts, we would like to teach more in-depth concepts. While teaching the basics of MongoDB and NoSQL is important, it is equally as crucial to introduce students to more complex features, skills, and problems. We would also like to integrate MongoDB University courses into our educational resources and make those accessible for university students who lack technical experience. Through a future collaboration, we believe that both Bit Project and MongoDB will be able to better achieve our goals of making technical education more accessible and approachable to a larger university student network. We look forward to seeing what our partnership with MongoDB has to offer in the future.





Abstract: This case study talks about the importance of educating students more on NoSQL databases. It also describes its partnership with MongoDB to create an interactive workshop with students where they could learn more on NoSQL. In the concluding paragraphs, a reflection on the collaboration process is presented as well as future goals. 

Strengths: Very clear organization- it was easy to see the steps of the collaboration process with MongoDB. It was also great to add background information on MongoDB and its goals and compare them to the Bit Project's goals. The explanation of NoSQL was also clear and wasn't too technical. 

Weaknesses: If possible, some sentences can definitely be more concise (some were slightly run-on), but this can be fixed with word choice. I was wondering if there was any particular reason why NoSQL was chosen as the Bit Project's focus here- why was it important for Bit Project to focus on NoSQL in particular? Also, in "plans for the future", the kind of educational resources can be specified. (word count: 1078)
