# A Guide to Technical Writing
## 🔥 Do not edit this file, copy the template and create your own file
### Step One
**Title:**

A Guide to Technical Writing (Even if You Aren't Very Technical)

**Topic:**

- Giving writing tips and resources on how to write a technical blog
- Maybe focusing on people on the writing team with less tech background 

**Description:**

This blog will teach how to write an effective technical blog. I will explain the appropriate writing style, what resources you can use, and how to learn about a topic without prior experience. 

**Target Audience:**

This blog is meant for people who are writing about technical topics they might not be familiar with. Probably more useful for people with no experience, but also might be helpful for the Dev team if they are confused about how to start their blogs.

### Step Two
**Outline Blog:**

**Intro**
Technical writing is extremely useful when working with any organization that uses or offers technical resources. Whether writing for internal use, like explaining how to use a platform to fellow employees, or for an audience, when publishing a tutorial on a concept related to your company, these guidelines can help streamline the writing process and give you the tools to write an effective and informative technical article.  

**Body**

Before writing, make sure you understand how to explain the concept you're writing about. Even if you don't know a lot about a topic, there are a few ways you can learn more to write a good blog. 
- Interviews: Reach out to people in your organization who have more experience and ask if they are willing to have an informational interview. Check out this post on how to conduct a good interview for more information: [link to interview blog]
- Online research: It may seem obvious that the internet is a resource, but it's easy to be discouraged by a complicated topic and forget how much information is online. There are several technical websites, ranging from general code explanations to specific topics, that can outline what you're writing about very clearly. Be careful not to plagiarize writing (sometimes you come across a blog very similar to yours), but do use what you learn to write your own explanation. 

Technical writing is different from a typical blogpost. The topic, who you're writing it for and why can all contribute to variances in style and tone, but there are some basic rules that will help the article succeed. 
- Keep it professional 
- Know the level you're writing for: You don't want to over-explain to advanced learners or leave out context for beginners. Be sure to check in about who will be referencing your article before you delve into the technical concepts. 
- Include images, videos or diagrams: These can be really helpful, especially when explaining how to navigate a platform or referencing something specific. Avoid fluffy photos; only use ones that enhance the understanding of a concept.

**Conclusion**
These tips can improve your ability to write about technical topics, even when you don't have a lot of past experience. Not only that, but when using the right resources, you can learn a lot about something and teach it to yourself in the process of writing about it. 
